This is Neil Baldwin.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
You're going to tell me something important.
We'll get it out there.
No, it's all Thomas Edison on this side.
Then below that is my, because I started out in poetry.
Then that's all poetry there, poetry there.
Then over here is William Carlos Williams, because my first book was on William Carlos Williams, which I think you said you had a copy of.
And then above that is all the Man Ray stuff, and over there is Man Ray, because the second one was on Man Ray.
And over here, this corner, those two shelves there, and all this stuff lying on the floor, is my next book, my Mexico book.
My book on the Plumed Serpent.
How does that, how does that, I can see a connection.
You don't mind giving me some quotes now, I hope.
But then I thought we could go out and eat something.
You must be starving.
I'm fine, whatever.
See, I see a connection between the three books.
How do you good?
Maybe I'm reaching, but how does Mexico fit in it, does it?
See, my sort of unofficial subtitle is The Biography of a Myth.
In other words, the first three books I wrote, which at the time I started, I obviously didn't know I was going to write a trilogy or anything like that.
What, do you see it as a trilogy?
Now?
Yeah.
As a matter of fact, I do.
In a kind of... Good stuff.
Okay, great.
Not in a pretentious way.
It just dawned on me the other day when I looked at the three of them, that they all dealt with the American imagination.
Basically we have that, yeah.
I quite agree.
The three facts... Sure.
People didn't understand the transition from William Carlos Williams to Man Ray until I pointed out that we were dealing with very highly developed imagination in both cases.
And in the third instance, I felt that I wanted to show how the sources for inspiration in the creative mind
The process is very similar, it doesn't matter whether you're composing a poem, making a photograph, or producing an invention.
I just got finished writing a proposal for a magazine article that we're going to submit tomorrow on the notebooks of Thomas Edison, which I feel are so similar to the raw materials of a poet or the sketchbooks of an artist.
He left behind 3,500 laboratory notebooks.
I mean, you could spend the rest of your life in that.
And no one's ever really taken a look at them as a genre.
I view them as an unknown genre into themselves.
I guess there's only like ten days where he actually kept a diary, in that sense.
But these notebooks, they start in the 1870s when he was a young man, and the last one was written two or three months before his death.
Every invention, as well as some things that never even saw the light of day, spring from these laboratory notebooks.
They're all in the Edison Archives in West Orange, right down the road from here.
Oh, that's great.
Isn't that wonderful?
Is that in the book?
No.
That's not in the book?
Not in the book.
Boy, he's an old guy there.
That was one of the last, his last, you see how he's scribbling in there with that black pencil, that stubby pencil?
So I believe that, I guess what I'm really doing is examining
I mean, it's American.
All three of these were American giants in different ways, and so the nature of American indigenous creativity interested me tremendously.
Not to mention the fact that in all three cases, we have people who were well on in years who were still doing some of their greatest work, and late-life creativity is something else that has been interesting for a long time.
It is interesting, though, the first two guys were decidedly 20th-century
the two cents.
Straddle is the word that you use as a matter of fact.
The artist I think of most potently is Yeats, the poet, who was one of my early favorites, whose dates were 1865 to 1939, sort of relatively similar to Edison.
a creature of the 19th century who grew up in the Romantic era.
I could be talking about both people, and who gradually had to adapt to the conditions of modernism aesthetically, in the case of Yeats, and technologically, in the case of Edison.
And they were sort of on the one hand defining and on the other hand responding to the conditions of their age as older people.
You know, the part at the end of the book where I talk about the research into the rubber plant is, to me, is analogous to the dark tower, the last poems of Yeats, and William Carlos Williams' long eleganic poetry at the end of his life, Man Ray at the end was doing some of his most
I don't think this is what drew you to Edison.
No, I did not say that.
No, no.
That would be too neat.
No, no, no.
You don't know how these things are.
You see them now, I think.
Yeah.
You see them now in reflection and in retrospect and haven't done the work.
But I think we're good.
I'm not, um, presuming here.
I'm not, uh, I'm relatively young.
I'm not young young, but I'm not old, you know.
You're younger than I am.
I mean, I feel young.
But I don't, look, I'm not looking back on my career now and saying this is what I've done.
But I do think, I was talking to someone in the phone when he's out here,
I really think the roots of this book, Thomas Edison's book, go back to my very early days of college, freshman year of college when I took some courses on American intellectual history.
This is in the mid-'60s.
There was a new discipline, the University of Rochester.
American intellectual history, the whole concept that you could define a culture
in another way, that you could define it through the great thinkers, had never occurred to me.
I was eighteen years old at the time.
Freshman course, American Intellectual History, Loren Barrett, B-A-R-I-T-T, L-O-R-E-N, Loren Barrett.
He was my professor.
He's now at Albany.
And he wrote a book called City on a Hill, which is about the roots for American thought, like Perry Miller and some of those
people of the New England theorists, Nature of the Nation, as another book that I used.
And that was when the notion dawned on me that there was more to a culture than wars and battles and the great sort of scientific history.
There was a whole intellectual subtext that was there that you should really learn about.
It was an influential course for the history.
the works of Kenneth Burke.
And I also took a course taught by Norman O. Brown, who was a great psychoanalytic historian of the time.
And I remember at that time thinking that the psyche of a nation could be defined.
These are very, very early thoughts.
You were majoring in what?
I was a history major.
That's the other thing.
I wasn't always a literary, a literati.
I started out as a history major.
And then I went to England for a year and took history over there.
And it wasn't until I got there.
We need, as you know, for these PDW pieces, we need the biographical stuff, if you don't mind my asking.
No, that's fine.
I went to the University of Manchester in the north of England, and I stayed there for a year.
I had several of the history faculty over there, very mainstream courses on European history, continental and English history.
This was when?
67, 68.
So you graduated from Rochester?
69.
So this was like a junior you arrived there?
Uh-huh.
And then, so I graduated from Rochester in 69.
very solid grounding in history, and then I went into grad school at Buffalo in a PhD program in English, because I got a fellowship, teaching fellowship.
But even then, my inclination was to get into the scope of an era, rather than
the particulars of one figure or one bracketed time.
I even then remember thinking I wanted to learn all about modernism.
I wanted to take on the entire modern tradition.
And I ended up going back into the Romantics and studying about Coleridge and Byron and Keats and Blake
And all of that, sort of, I ended up really becoming more interested in the roots for modernism, which I saw really go back to the romantics.
So I got into all of that.
I had an omnivorous hunger to get the sense of an entire period.
And that's how I got into William and Carlisle.
See, it makes, Williams and Man Ray make perfect sense at this point, don't they?
Yes.
which will be the focus of this piece, represents kind of a departure, I would say.
I do see the connection there.
I've worked my way through so many things that, as you're pointing out, it's too facile to act like I was moving toward this consciously, because I never felt that I had a plan.
I know one of my great fascinations is creativity.
Where does it come from?
Can you explain it?
To write about an inventor, to me, what is a great writer?
I mean, Shakespeare, writing was magic.
He pulled this stuff out of the air.
I do see a connection, by the way.
It's very interesting.
People who can't believe that Shakespeare is Shakespeare.
Well, he never went to college.
How could Shakespeare, this guy didn't even have a grade school education, did he?
Tell him I said it's a point.
He dropped out after three months.
So where the hell does it come from?
Who knows?
I'm sorry to jump around.
No, let me just give you the cumulative part.
I mean, so I get to grad school.
I start to hunger for this omnivorous hunger for an entire period of just three years.
You know, I might shoot a couple shots of you.
You know, I don't know.
I don't mind.
I wore my tie and everything.
You look great.
Just keep talking.
This is a great setting, too.
Oh, you've got all my books and everything?
I've got everything, yeah.
This is a perfect feeling for books, too.
So are you a photographer also?
Yeah, you know, it helps.
Everything, every little skill helps.
Every piece I've been for P.W.
We've illustrated with my picture.
I know.
And how did you hook up with that?
Rebecca wants to make it clear that, I mean, I guess the reason I'm putting this in a thing is that there's this huge scholarly underpinning that I think is important to understand.
Don't mind me, all right?
Me as an author, the scholarly aspect and the training that I had, the professional training that I've had,
in grad school, the rigor, you know, of getting a PhD, even though it was in a different discipline.
Do you mind taking your glasses off, or do you always take it?
I always take, I always take with my glasses on.
Okay.
That's fine.
It's just so old.
Yeah, that's fine.
Go ahead.
So, anyway, so I'm getting my PhD.
I'm looking, I couldn't think of what to write an dissertation on.
This happens to me.
I was very involved in collecting and very fired up about the spirit of inquiry, but I had no idea what I was going to write my dissertation about.
And someone told me that all the odd papers of William Carlos Williams were in the archive and poetry collection at the State University at Buffalo, or William Carlos Williams' manuscripts, and they were uncatalogued.
Was that going to go difficult?
So here was an opportunity.
The university was looking for somebody to go through all these papers and systematically make them into a conference.
Did you have any research help?
I was a grad student making $65 a week, and a friend of mine, a fellow grad student,
and I signed up to do this together, and we got the approval of the English department to accept the descriptive catalog of all of William Carlos Lindsay's papers as a dissertation, as fulfilling the dissertation requirements.
And it was published by G. K. Hall & Company, which was in your neck of the woods.
Yes, Alan Peacock.
He's a good guy.
So this was published by G.K.
Hall with a preface by Robert Creeley, the poet who was a mentor with another New Englander, Robert Creeley.
He's someone you should be great to interview sometime.
He's in Buffalo now.
I have interviewed him.
He came to Worcester a year and a half ago.
I consider him to be one of my mentors.
All right, you know what we're going to do?
We're going to shoot available light.
Do you mind that?
Yeah, we can go out.
We're going to go out to lunch anyway.
Go ahead, keep talking.
So we rewrote the preface for that, but that was an extremely rigorous and extremely arduous
in Denver, and taught me how to do, to absorb a huge amount of information in a very brief period of time, which is a skill you have to have, you know, in a biography.
We're going to shoot the pictures after this, because I'm not concentrating on the number one thing that I should be doing.
You know what I'm saying?
Yeah.
So, there I am, with my freshly mentioned PhD, and
And I was unable to get a job because 1973 was documented as the year in which there were more PhDs and less jobs in the history of PhD granting.
So I had to retool my abilities and I entered the non-profit sector and that's when my
Okay, just for the record, it's 1978, and this is a Stephen with a beat, right, L. Myers, M-E-Y-E-R, and the pre-league of the preface.
That's quite a coup, isn't it?
Well, we've studied with him, and he was our... Very wonderful one.
Yeah, he's been a great support to me over the years.
He's a spiritual supporter.
So the point I wanted to make there is that I've really had two careers, contiguous, co-existent careers.
I mean, I've always had full-time institutional jobs in the non-profit sector for two decades, raising money.
I've worked for the Artists in Schools program.
I worked at the Poets and the Schools of Poets and Writers, Teachers and Writers Collaborative.
I worked for Art Park, which is a major art center up in Buffalo as an administrator.
I worked for the New York Public Library in New York City for five years, helping to run the major capital campaign.
I ran the annual giving program there.
And the last about years I've been running the National Book Foundation, as you may know, sponsoring the National Book Awards, and they've built it up into a, it's almost a million dollar a year operation now.
And that thing came out of Rose from the Ashes, didn't it?
Yes, it did.
And this is not necessarily for the... No, it's true, it rose from the ashes.
The foundation was created and I was hired to make it into something.
That was a 90-year standard?
It was about five and a half years.
And all during that time, that's when I've written all of my books, and people say to me, I don't know how you do it and how you do it.
There's a sort of sense of incredulity about it.
And you will understand this.
It's very, very hard to do these two things at the same time.
And just today, I mean, I've already been in touch with my office several times in New York, and there's a whole lot of stuff going on.
And I'm always in a state of being cold one way or the other.
And all my books have been written on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
And, you know, Man Ray involved travel to Europe several times, which I did took on my vacation from the library.
And so I had no idea what it would be like to be a full-time writer.
I have absolutely never been to an artist colony.
I've never gotten a grant for anything, you know, for my writing.
I've gotten lots of grants for the organizations that I've worked for.
I've raised millions and millions of dollars.
That's a good quote.
You don't mind if we use it?
No, you can use anything you want.
But the point I'm trying to make is I have written, I have spent my entire career writing Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, vacations, and reading.
The only thing I can do during the week is read.
Like on the train going to work, on the bus or train coming back, at night, after dinner, after the kids.
By the way, we have two children.
They're going to be very mad at me if I don't mention their names.
Nicholas is my daughter.
Allegra is my daughter.
And how do we spell Allegra?
A-L-L-E-G-R-A.
She's 13 and Nicholas is 15.
And my wife's name is Roberta.
R-O-B-E-R-T-A.
Right.
And she's Roberta Plumstick.
P-L-U-T-T-I-K.
And she works for the Association of American Publishers in the New York City.
She runs the trade general publishing division in New York, AAP.
You know that.
I know.
True.
So she does that.
So, anyway, I have no idea what it would be like to be a full-time writer.
Would you like to be a full-time writer?
I think I'd like to know what it would be like before
I mean, I'd like to at least have the... I'd like to know what it would be like.
Yes.
I just can't imagine being able to wake up in the morning and have the... to be able to just launch into... Luxury is probably the word.
Maybe, because all my writing is done under the most extreme, extreme extenuating circumstances.
And you're able to pick up.
I mean, you're able to put it away on Monday morning...
Oh, you just put on your finger on the hardest thing.
The hardest thing is Monday morning is very hard for me because when I take Fridays off, which I try to do as often as I can, it's not always possible to take Fridays off because of the demands of the institutional role that I have, this tremendous organization.
And I have a very good staff, but, I mean, things are always happening.
So let's say I'm able to take Friday off.
Friday is the buffer zone.
It takes me all of Friday to get my mind into the right position.
So Friday, there's no writing.
Saturday morning, things start to pick up.
Starting around lunchtime on Saturday is very good.
Sunday is usually eight hours.
totally terrific, the best.
But Monday morning is the worst, the transitional moment.
Leaving it, too, because you do get absorbed in this stuff.
Yeah, well, you have to walk away from it.
And then, you know, in the back of your mind, you're thinking about it, and I tell people not to call me during the week on book-related matters and not to bring it up, but obviously, especially now, you know this period, this is like, there's basically a month-to-cub date
And it's like there's just a lull before the storm because there's all this stuff building up.
Are you excited, though?
Yes, I am.
Are you anxious as well?
I am nervous.
Don't be, because the book's wonderful.
I'm just nervous.
I'm not reading it as a critic as well, you know.
I mean, I read these books critically.
It's a good book.
No, I think it's a good book.
I'm nervous like the way I was before my kids were born.
It feels exactly the same.
When my wife was very, very pregnant, and we knew that the kids were going to come, that it was going to happen soon, you're excited because you want it to happen, but you're nervous because you want it to be good.
I know it's almost a cliché that just dates in it and all that, because it was four years in the making, three and a half years in the making.
That's pretty darn good.
I would have thought it took a lot more time than that.
Well, no.
But you see, a lot of it's happening on another level in my mind all the time.
I'm not complaining, and as a matter of fact, I don't consider myself to be
a complaining writer, of which there are many, because I only write things that I really, really want to write, and I only embark upon a project that I really, really want to do, and I really want to do it, and it's a treat, and it's basically very, very satisfying in the end.
But there's no question that the
It's the back and forth, the wear and tear on your psyche when one day you're dealing with institutional development, board relations, budgets, talking to donors, program development, staff, personnel, payroll, correspondence, phone call every five minutes.
you know, which is basically what it's like at the National Book Awards now.
And then, you know, you step back from that and you come back and do this, you're in your study, you're by yourself, you're trying to, you have to induce, you have to artificially almost make yourself become reflective.
Is this a therapeutic exercise for you, the writing, or is it just a different life?
I mean, do we really just change hats from
Well, is there something you do for pleasure, or is there a pain in the back?
I don't know.
I want—as I think I said this before, I have this very omnivorous feeling about information and learning as much about something as I can.
It's a very good feeling when I'm in the groove and I'm absorbing all this information.
I wouldn't call it therapeutic.
It's more like the satisfying of a hunger that's not satisfied by the other things I do.
The other things I do are very satisfying in other ways, too.
No, I'm getting the sense here that you enjoy this other.
You said you had no idea what it would be like to be a full-time writer, and I said, that Ted Wiesner, who I just did a couple weeks ago, I mean this guy just, he fantasizes about what it would be like to be able to do nothing.
I mean when we played it down, he said, well don't, don't, I'm very grateful that he was in golf, and he said, I don't want to, you know, but he would love nothing more than to, and when he had to get up and drive into Boston on those days,
But see, I'm very conflicted about it.
Frankly, everyone knows I'm conflicted about it.
Everybody I know in my institutional life is aware of that I'm conflicted, because I'm very social, I have the capacity, I'm very sociable, I love to go out to lunch with people, I love going to the National Arts Club and having lunch with people, and I love going to
champagne receptions and i love our board meetings because they're exciting and we have them in different people's ceos offices and i like hanging out with ceos and i like raising money and i'm very good at it but i also just to meet you know to be up here by myself for a whole day with the radio on and just clicking away on my computer right with the radio
The very low, WNYC, public radio.
Public radio!
Which I hope with Mr. Gingrich we were able to keep.
No, I'm a, you know, that's what I listen to, and keep it very low.
I don't listen to talk, only music.
But the point is that I have equally hunger for that.
He loves being a lawyer.
I know he does.
I've talked to him about it recently, actually.
But I do think it would be interesting to know what it would be like to only be responsible for my work, my writing.
I would be misleading if I said that that wasn't something I would like to do.
With this thesis, we get the actual title of it, The Manuscripts and Letters of Wayne Foster.
And let me just tell the contractor, okay, something good.
Now I'll write this down.
These things are great, I think.
That's one of those miniature ones?
Yeah.
I'm a New York native.
On my mother's side, I'm a third generation Manhattanite.
My grandmother, my mother, and myself, we were all born in Manhattan, and my kids were born in New York.
So they're the fourth.
That's true.
But then after living in Brooklyn Heights, we lived there from 77 to 86.
and the kids were born, you know, in the late 70s, early 80s, and they got to be big and moved out here, which was very hard for me because I was an urban animal, you know.
But I've adjusted.
It's a nice system.
I love little towns.
It's very beautiful.
Very beautiful.
This is probably, what, half an hour from the city here?
You take the train?
Well, I can get to my office.
I leave usually
I take the 8.06 train and I'm in my office by about 9.
That's great.
And on the weekends my daughter takes dance in New York and on Saturdays we drive her in and it takes about 20 minutes, just like that, in the car.
I figured four hours to get down here this morning and I did it in three and a half with a 15 minute stop for guests, you know, and it was terrific.
No, so there I am with my divided life, I meant to make that point, and my twenty years working in the non-profit sector and raising money and doing institutional development writing biographies.
And along the way, having to become habituated to this rhythm of constrained way of writing.
compressed and constrained with writing.
I just wanted to make sure that I explained that to people because it's been very productive for me and I wonder what would happen if I didn't have those pressures.
I wonder how it would affect my work.
But that's neither him nor there.
That's the way it happened.
That's my life.
No, the dissertation was 1978, so... It was published in 78.
Published in 78.
And you finished graduate school when?
73.
And then you, just to get the... Yeah, that space there.
Yeah.
I spent, I basically got my PhD, and I immediately found that there were no jobs for teaching English.
That was when I was trained to be an English professor.
I had never been an English professor.
I've been a part-time English teacher, and I've taught in every institution of higher learning in New York City.
NYU, City College, Baruch College, the New School, and Fordham.
Columbia.
Everything.
Not Columbia, that's the only one I haven't taught at.
And I've taught courses in the summertime, I've taught courses at night, I've taught courses in my lunch hour, I've taught, you know, this, that, and the other.
I've never been a full-time English professor.
As I say, I had to retool and I had to go into another and totally different area of livelihood, which was a pretty big shock.
It's like going to medical school and then being told you can't be a doctor, you know.
I thought I was going to be a professor, but actually I think it's been fortuitous for me because I've basically been into, the first phase was, as I say, arts.
arts in education, you know, the whole artist in school movement.
I was one of the pioneers of that.
I wrote a book about teaching poetry to children called The Poetry Writing Handbook.
That was published by Scholastic.
That was a nice work.
Now, what was it that, I mean, is there a defining event that encourages you to believe, you know, I can really
I can bring the heat as the pitchers say.
I can really bring that fastball in there.
What was it that prompted you to believe that you could really write at this major league level?
How funny that you put it that way.
Pardon me.
You have to feel, I mean here you are, you're having a sense of pre-publication jitters.
what people are going to think about it, I guess.
I think if I didn't have that, I'd be worried.
Yeah, I agree.
I'm not, I am, I'll be frank with you, I think this is the best book I've ever done, in many ways, because it's a good read, and yet it's got 150 pages of scholarship at the back for anybody who's, but I wanted to tell a story, a really good story, and I didn't want my erudition to get in the way of that.
I am obsessed with the
the importance of a good narrative.
I worked so hard on the transitions, every sort of segue to me is key.
So you ask me, well, when did I think I could be a major league writer?
I never even thought in those terms.
I just, I really would like an audience.
I want an audience, a big audience, frankly.
I do.
I want a big audience.
I don't want to be, I didn't want to write a doorstop.
There's no reason to apologize.
No, I didn't want to write a thousand-page doorstop.
I remember Jenny Cox, the editor who acquired this book, who's no longer at Hyperion, but she deserves the credit because she thought of the idea.
Jenny was a J. Cox, C-O-X.
And she was an editor?
At Hyperion.
Now she's left to raise her young children.
She lives up in Westchester.
And she said to me, Neil, this isn't going to be a doorstop, I hope.
And I said, no.
A thousand-page biography, for instance.
As a genre, I'm not casting aspersions on thousand-page biographies per se.
But to me, I don't see the point of it.
I think if you want to tell a story of a person's life,
You want to keep your reader, and you want to hold their attention, and you want to make it like a novel.
I'm proud that my friend Gloria Naylor, the author, she's a friend of mine, and she's a novelist, I think, of the highest ability, and she felt that this read like a novel, and she felt that Thomas Edison was like a main character in a novel.
And I was very flattered by that, because I really, really wanted that to be the feeling of it.
No, I'm just, because you've had these two lives, you know, and I was a newspaper, I was a journalist for so many years, I've been an editor, but you know, up here is always this goal to write this book, and I guess you working institutionally and teaching
I'm wondering if hovering here is, I really want to be the writer, you know, and you've done it.
This is your third book now, and pretty brief.
You're a young guy.
Three biographies in a decade.
That's terrific.
What prompted you to do the first one?
I guess, of course, the Williams must have grown out of it.
The interesting thing about that was the William Carlos Williams book,
had fifteen years of momentum, and I wrote it in six months.
In other words, I started doing my work on Williams in the early seventies.
The book was published by Athenaeum in 84, and I wrote it in six months, but I had fifteen years of ferment.
Tell me, because P.W.
likes the publishing history.
Yeah, I know.
That's good that they do that.
Tell me how that came about.
Did you have an agent for the first book?
I've had three different agents for all three.
I've had different agents for every book.
Did you care to identify them?
Yeah, no.
I mean, I had very good relationships with all three of my agents.
My first agent was Richard Hutner, H-U-T-T-N-E-R.
Richard Hutner was an old school chum of mine.
I went to Horace Mann and the Riverdale Prep School, and he was a school friend of mine.
He agented that, and that was 1984.
Marcia Marshall, M-A-R-S-H-A-L-L.
And the second book was agented by Tim Schaffner, S-C-H-A-F-F-N-E-R.
His father was John Schaffner, who was a very, I'm sure a lot of these people who read PW will know, John Schaffner Associates.
John Schaffner was Tim's father, and he passed away, and Tim sort of backed into becoming an agent, and he was very young, and he did Man Ray, and placed it with Clarkson Potter, and my editor was Nancy Novogrod, who's the greatest NOV
O-G-R-O-D, a very gifted editor who went on to become editor-in-chief of House and Garden, and now she's editor of Travel and Leisure.
So there really was an opportunity to offer this to her?
No.
She began at the New Yorker.
She was at the New Yorker for ten years.
She worked directly for William Shawn, S-H-A-W.
Nancy was wonderful, and we're still friends, and now we keep in touch with each other.
They've kind of moved around in terms of editors and— But I've been very lucky.
I've been—and then the third iteration, Jenny Cox, the interesting thing about that is that she—well, she is married to another school.
a chum of mine, from Horace Mann, Howard Bloom, the author, B-O-U-M.
He wrote Out There, he wrote The Search for Nazis in America, that book about, he wrote the John Gotti book, he writes for Vanity Fair.
Oh, I interviewed him.
There was an SMS book, I think.
Yeah, he's a really good writer.
Howard, he's my age, actually.
He looks younger than him.
He worked at the New York Times for a while.
Yes, he was a reporter at The Voice.
Howard Bloom, married to Jenny.
And Howard was a fan, and he, Jenny, he said, you know, you've got to publish a book of Neil.
He's a wonderful writer, and she also knows my current agent, David Chalfant, C-H-A-L-F, as in Frank, A-N-T.
And David hooked me up with Jenny, and she took me out to lunch, and she had just joined Hyperion, which didn't even have a name or a letterhead.
I'm very impressed with what they've done.
This is four, it's not even four years.
Well it's first class from day one.
I mean you talk about hitting the ground, running, and like I was, again when they say I'm a friend of that, I've followed them from the first and written and been happy to write about their books in their office.
But I've been very impressed by what they've done.
Any reason why you moved around from agent to agent or anything that you cared about?
Yes.
Well, I learned my lesson.
You don't want to talk about it.
No.
The lesson is like this.
I do not, as I said to you before, I want to write what I want to write.
And agents, if an agent isn't excited about the project, you have two choices.
You can either do another project or get another agent.
My agent, whoever represents me, has to have the same degree of frenetic excitement about the project.
You have to be a champion of the book.
Otherwise it's the cart leading the horse.
I want to write what I want to write, and I mean the agent wants to represent what I want to write.
I'm not going to write what someone else, what they might want me to write.
So do I sense that maybe there was some of this?
Yeah, well, Richard, I think, wow, what happened with Richard?
He, I guess, you know, he didn't, he... We won't go into that.
I'm not going into that, but that's basically, I believe... I know how these things look in print, too.
It's project-driven.
Yeah.
And Richard was great.
That's a good phrase.
It is project-driven.
Yeah.
Richard was wonderful.
He used that.
Tim was good, and then Tim got out of the agent business entirely after a few years, so he moved out west.
And David, I've been with him for about five years now, and he's young and very hungry, and he's done a very good job.
And is he handling the next book?
Is the next book under contract to Hyperion?
The next book has been signed up by Hyperion.
It's called Tracking the Plumed Serpent, Adventures in Time and Space in Mexico.
Time and Space in Mexico.
In Mexico.
Now, does this require field work?
Yes.
Well, I've already been to Mexico a few times.
I've been working on this book.
It makes me sound like a maniac, but this is the fact of the matter, that this book had its gestation in 1988 when my wife and I went on a vacation on a whim.
We went to the Yucatan, just on a whim, and I became intoxicated with the
Mayan ruins in the Yucatan.
And I said to her, you know, one day I want to come back and I want to do a book on this whole area of the world.
I just, I have to.
And, um, so this, then the next year we went back again on another vacation, and I first sort of took notes on the basic theme of the book.
While all this other stuff was going on, A Man Ray was being finished and then Thomas Edison was being developed, this Mexico book was sort of slowly building up and I was acquiring books on that region and reading and doing a little research on it.
Did you have a focus on the book, though, at that point?
It's changed.
At first it was going to be, as I called it, a fatal shore
of the Yucatan.
But that was too bombastic, too big.
And then as I came to terms with the fact that I was a biographer, number one, I decided to focus on the major archetypal mythic figure of Mesoamerican culture.
The Plumed Serpent, Quetzalcoatl is the Q-U-E-T-Z-A-L-C-O-A-T-L.
And instead of writing a biography of a person's life, since another one of my interests has always been back in the poetry days, archetypes and cultural myths and beliefs and how they come to be,
I decided to find out as much as I could about this figure.
No one has ever taken the disparate stories from Aztec and Mayan cultures, the geographical iconography of the temples, the different versions of the story that have been passed down through the Spanish ethno-historians.
No one has ever taken all of that and plugged them into the geographical progress of the myth from northeastern Mexico to the Yucatan, through time from 1500 BC to the present, and put them all together into a coherent story.
How deeply are you into this, would you say?
Well, I've read about 250 books.
Has the writing started?
No.
I'm going to Mexico in April for two weeks.
and it's due and the book is supposed to be handed in September of 96.
I don't think it's going to be a problem because, as I say, it's sort of having this pre-writing process in my head.
And, um, I have sort of had a running start in my research going back to the first time I went to Mexico.
So, after that, I
I can see myself going back to another sort of major biography, but I don't know what it's going to be about.
Let's talk about Edison now, if we can.
It's a good idea.
Geographically.
It's very important, and it'll all be useful.
But now it's, what are we, 15 or 20 miles from, I mean, geographically?
Five miles away.
So let's talk a little bit about it.
Was it the coincidence of proximity, or what was it that first sparked the interest in Edison, or was it this fascination for, you know, invention, genius?
Two things.
One, three things.
The American story is a story that I've been concerned with for a long time,
explain to you, the American cultural story, how it came to be.
Going back to de Tocqueville, what does it mean?
What is the American story, and who represents it, and who says it, who tells it?
Number two, the nature of imagination and creativity is something that has preoccupied me for a long time.
Number three, after Man Ray was finished, I went through this crisis of
You know, this idealistic crisis that, well, any good biographer has to think of the subject himself.
It's got to come from within.
You know, you've got to think.
So I couldn't think of anybody.
So I started, you know, beating myself over the head, like, well, you know, if you can't think of anything, then I don't know what, you know, what worth are you.
So I went out to lunch with James Atlas, the biographer of Delmar Schwartz, who's an editor of the New York Times.
I told him this problem.
He said, Neil, I didn't think of a Delmore Schwartz biography idea.
That wasn't my idea.
He said, Roger Strauss proposed that to me.
And you don't have to think of it yourself.
Don't get hung up on that, you know.
And that was important by way of introducing the fact that this idea was proposed to me by Jenny Cox.
We had lunch.
She said, I want you to write a book for me, and I'm going to call you up every day and pitch you ideas.
What a wonderful circumstance.
Until we come up with a book for you to write for Hyperion.
So her assistant starts calling me every few days.
She must have had this terrific respect for your earlier work.
Yeah.
This is the guy.
Thank God.
I've been waiting for this.
Jenny Cox, right again, Jenny Cox, uh, flowered the book, but she left, and Rick, do you know who Rick caught, uh, R-I-C-K, caught K-O-T?
He is a, an incredible non-fiction editor.
He, he was at HarperCollins.
Ooh.
There was a nice day.
Coffee.
Coffee?
Is that you?
No.
Oh, you ought to, I'm sorry.
Don't sleep at all.
And the water.
I drink a lot of water.
All right.
Rick was at HarperCollins for a long time, and he joined Hyperion in the fall of 90s.
At which time my book was about two-thirds finished manuscript.
Well, there were anxious moments when you switched editors like that.
Well, there was a moment where I didn't have really anybody.
But I knew that Rick was moving to Hyperion and he is probably one of the best non-fiction editors in the entire industry.
He has a great reputation.
He's highly respected.
He did a gorgeous job on this manuscript.
I'll tell you, I love the juxtaposition of the photos, the integration of the photos.
I wanted to do it that way.
Did you know it's cheaper to do it that way?
No, I don't.
We haven't even submitted the pictures in my book yet.
I would love to have done it that way.
It's just going to be a 16-page album.
You know, so what.
Well, I wanted, that goes back to my narrative idea.
I wanted the pictures to tie in exactly to the text, and you'll probably see they really do hit exactly when I'm talking about whatever I'm talking about.
But you have such wonderful pictures, too.
Well, they're, that's, they really have a rocket.
The photo research is done by me, and, um,
Of course, I had a lot of experience with Man Ray doing all those photos.
So what else can I tell you?